and uh gary is an equality uh inequality
economist and also a former trader and i
asked him whether he thought this was
enough
uh well i think
it's uh it's something obviously people
out there who are low ages will be will
be grateful but when we look at what's
happening to costs for ordinary people
increases in
food costs fuel costs petrol costs and
especially people who might have been on
universal credits in that car as well
i think people are going to find that
life's going to get harder in the future
and i think if we put this in the
context of a coronavirus crisis which
has seen billionaire wealth go up by
over 100 billion pounds i think there's
a legitimate question to be asking about
whether more needs to be done for the
ordinary working people of this country
well particularly i think you know given
many people rather like the government
are in debt and uh maybe don't always
get the number of hours per week that
they need and it still strikes me that
it must be very very difficult to live
on a wage of of nine pounds 18 an hour
yeah i mean i i am i wrote a letter with
the group today to the chancellor to say
we need to um
rethink the raising of national
insurance and ordinary working people
and perhaps shift that burden towards
richer people and i've had so many
messages today from people saying you
know thanks around this letter because
we're out here working every day
struggling just to put food on the table
and it's just getting harder and um
yeah i think
we need to look at that
and ask why have they raised taxes on
ordinary people and national insurance
specifically excludes taxing
billionaires and the question has to be
asked you know our chances of family are
billionaires is this one of the reasons
why richie turner has chosen to tax
ordinary people instead of billionaires
who've seen their wealth explode during
the crisis do you think this is likely
to gain rishi sunak any popularity
amongst those people who it affects or
would it be seen rather more cynically
simply as a token increase rather like
uh many workers in the ns nhs or the
increase that they received some time
ago
well i think a lot of people are you
know people are on the tough end of
things here they can see that they've
been given with one hand and taken away
with the other it's exactly as i've said
you know universal credit has been cut
from the families most in these national
insurance has been risen on that starts
on workers 9 000 pounds a year and at
the same time billionaires have been
excluded the message i want to tell
these people because i think ordinary
people they see how hard it is for them
but what they don't realize is just how
much money billionaires have made in
this crisis the top three families in
this country the mittels the reubens and
the blavatniks increased their wealth by
20 billion pounds during the pandemic
that's 20 000 million pounds and the
national insurance rise is supposed to
raise 10 billion pounds a year so this
tax which has been risen from ordinary
people they could have risen that twice
over from three families and made them
just as rich as they were before the
pandemic and had enough money left to by
cristiano ronaldo 35 times
if indeed you'd want to do that i
suppose some people would if they were
if they were interested in football i'm
not personally but you know is there
therefore a case for
very simple
old-fashioned suggestion that the labour
party would have echoed on goodness
knows how many occasions in his
existence of making taxes higher for the
very richest and increasing maybe
either universal credit or the national
living rage buy more than he has
yeah first things first go back and
revisit this national insurance right
this is low paid workers paying tax and
and move shift that focus to the
wealthiest at the moment we're taxing
workers and the very wealthiest people
billionaires are sometimes paying lower
rates than their cleaners this is not
acceptable and it leads to a situation
where ordinary people are seeing money
sucked out of their pockets and put into
pockets of billionaires but what does
that do to the economy ordinary people
to spend that in businesses local shops
billionaires are just going to use that
to buy our mom's houses and push the
house prices up
what about something you mentioned
earlier on and that is universal credit
which as far as i can as far as i know
um if you're earning you know pretty
much nothing per month you you get 400
pounds in the region of 400 pounds a
month now see once again um in terms of
a social security payment as we used to
perhaps call it i know it's not quite
the same system these days that strikes
me as very little
yeah and one thing i just want to make
clear because i know some people are
aware of this but some people might not
be a huge percentage i think is about 40
maybe even more of universal credit
recipients are working people and they
have to receive this because wages are
so low for so many people and living
costs so high that they can't afford
even though they're working to take care
of a family you know this is a
ridiculous system and it needs to be
changed straight away we should look at
the taxes these people pay and we should
reduce them straight away the fact that
they're playing national insurance when
they at nine thousand pounds that you
cannot support family on nine thousand
pounds take these guys out of the tax
system reduce the taxes on ordinary
hard-working people and move the taxes
to billionaires this this this
should be classic common sense but
unfortunately our chance of the family
are billionaires and if you are a
billionaire you probably prefer that to
be paid by builders and cleaners
what about let's think about it from the
the other side of the coin if you like
what about um small employers um who may
argue that they can't afford this
increase in the national living wage
well i mean i think this goes back down
to the economy you know we need to of
course we need to support some more
employers but at the moment because
we're sucking
spending power away from ordinary people
we're making it hard for
these small employers as well but
the question ultimately is that who is
it who has the money here you mentioned
the government debt right government
debt as you know has increased by 450
billion pounds during the pandemic
that's enormous that's 10 000 pounds per
person okay well who do we owe that
money to you know we don't owe it to
mars obviously whose wealth has
increased it's the billionaires it's the
super rich you know it's not rocket
science okay government is struggling
ordinary people are struggling all of
that money all of that debt is to the
billionaires this is where the money is
this is where the wealth is this is
where the spending power is if you want
a strong economy you have to find a way
to tax them i know i'm nailing the
hammer on their heads here but but you
know i'm an economist i've made lots of
money betting on these things if we
don't find a way to tax the billionaires
it's going to be a very difficult
economy for the rest of us and just
finally uh tell me gary how you feel
this will play in the house when it's
announced tomorrow in the in the budget
how will the labour party respond
well i'm not sure i'm not too well
connected with a labor party i know
there's lots of different people lots of
different views um you know i would
imagine of course they will support a
rise um
i would suggest that they question
whether this rise will be enough to
counter all of the different missiles
that come in ordinary working families
here and i would
suggest that they say yes it's good to
raise the minimum wage but it's not
going to be enough and we need to do
more to help the ordinary hard working
families of this country all right that
was a gary stevenson an inequality
economist and an economist and a former
trader um discussing this morning on lbc
the rise that will be announced tomorrow
of the
national living wage to nine pounds
fifty if you are over 23. do you feel
that that is enough do you welcome at
the rise are you somebody who feels
undervalued by your employer
are you somebody who's struggling to
make ends meet oh three four five six oh
six oh nine seven three back in a few
moments time
housing could be so much more affordable
wages could be so much higher and we
could have so many more options in how
we live our lives some of them put a lot
of money into paying economists and
think tanks to tell you that inequality
is important for the economy
that is not true
[Music]